The Master of Science in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Business Analytics MS-AIBA, formerly known as the Master of Science in Business 
Analytics and Information Systems, prepares students for growing needs in industry for expertise in business analytics, data science, data 
engineering, and information technology across a wide range of sectors including technology, banking, healthcare, consulting, energy, retail, 
entertainment, telecom, and many others. Our graduates secure internships and jobs in companies such as Amazon, Google, Microsoft, Adobe, 
Tesla, Samsung, McKinsey, Goldman Sachs, Cap Gemini, Booz & Company, Deloitte, Citi, Bank of America, JP Morgan Chase, Capital One, SAS 
Institute, Amgen, Verizon, Disney, Paypal, TechData, Raymond James Financial, Quicken Loans, Publix, and Spectrum Brands. Starting salaries of 
our graduates are typically in the $100,000-125,000 range, with higher salaries for jobs on the West Coast.

We offer a strong industry-relevant curriculum emphasizing technology skills such as business analytics, machine/deep learning, SQL and NoSQL 
databases, agile methods, coding and scripting, networks and security, cloud computing, and big data. An advisory board consisting of senior 
business leaders and information systems executives works closely with the department to ensure that the program stays relevant and maintains 
high standards. Classes in the program are taught by a world-class faculty with PhD degrees from Harvard Business School, Princeton 
University, Northwestern University, University of Chicago, University of Maryland, University of Texas at Austin, Purdue University, 
University of Michigan, New York University, University of Pennsylvania, Indiana University, Georgia Tech, University of Arizona, and many 
others. Students have the option of working in full-time or part-time internships and customized independent study opportunities with 
professors as part of the program.

The program also offers a suite of extra-curricular activities to complement our curriculum and to help our students improve their technology 
skills, internship and job placement potential, and career success. These activities include free technology bootcamps, certification 
programs, resume workshops, LinkedIn workshops, interview workshops, career fairs, and many others. Outstanding students will also have the 
opportunity to participate in practice center projects (mentored internships managed by the department) and get employment opportunities as 
teaching assistants or graduate research assistants throughout USF campus. 

ADMISSIONS
Admission to our program is extremely competitive. We receive thousands of applicants each year and admit only about 250 students annually. We 
admit students in both the Fall and the Spring semester. We evaluate applications on a rolling basis and close the process when our student 
intake capacity is reached.

For the Fall semester, the early deadline for application is March 1 for international students and July 1 for domestic students. Applications 
received after these deadlines will be considered only if seats are still available.  For international applicants, we try to make our final 
admission decisions by April to give them sufficient time to get visa appointments at their local U.S. consulate or embassy. For the Spring 
semester, our application deadline is August 1 for international students and November 1 for domestic students. However, we admit most of our 
students in Fall, and Spring admissions are very limited. 

Our admission decisions are based on “portfolio criteria” that includes the following components. Please note that incomplete applications 
(e.g., missing GRE scores, unless explicitly waived by us) will NOT be processed until they are completed:

Fully completed application, including payment of application fee. 
We do not entertain requests for application fee waivers.
A four-year bachelor’s degree from an accredited university.
We prefer applicants with technology majors such as computer science, engineering, etc., though we may also consider non-technology majors if 
they have demonstrated solid technology skills or have technology-focused work experience.
Applicants with a 3-year bachelor’s degree from an accredited institution must also meet the following requirements: (1) Minimum GMAT score of 
650 or a minimum GRE score of 321 (combined verbal and quantitative), with a minimum of 25th percentile in the verbal portion of the test, and 
(2) if the 3-year bachelor’s degree is less than 120 hours from Non-Bologna Accord Institutions, a transcript evaluation from a NACES member 
is required to confirm equivalency.
GMAT or GRE scores  
We give higher consideration to in-center GRE/GMAT tests and discourage at-home or online tests.
The GRE/GMAT requirement may be waived for applicants with 3 years or more of relevant full-time work experience in information technology, 
information systems, or business analytics in the United States. Working in a foreign country for a U.S. client will NOT qualify for this 
waiver.
Applicants with a Bachelor’s degree in information technology, information systems, or business analytics from USF or equivalent U.S. 
universities with a GPA of 3.5 or higher may also request a waiver of the GRE/GMAT exam.
International applicants are NOT eligible for GRE/GMAT waiver irrespective of length of work experience.
Applicants requesting such waivers should provide appropriate documentation, explaining how they meet the above waiver criteria. Waiver 
requests will be evaluated on a case by case basis.
Relevant work experience in information technology, information services, business analytics, or related sectors.
This is a very important component of our admissions criteria. We will consider students with extensive industry experience, even if they have 
less than desired GMAT or GRE scores, and even if their work experience is not in information technology or related fields.
Two letters of recommendations.
A completed information form that we will send out upon receipt of your application.
In addition, all applicants must meet USF’s Admission and English Proficiency requirements. For international applicants, this means TOEFL 
scores, although we do not consider TOEFL score as part of our admission criteria. 

ADMISSION PROCESS
Applications are first reviewed by our Office of Graduate Admissions and are then forwarded to our MS in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
Business Analytics program for further review. The MS in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Business Analytics program makes an accept/reject 
decision, and the Office of Graduate Admissions will notify you of our decision. The admission decision usually takes 1.5 to 2 months, and 
visas for international students may take an additional 3 to 4 months. Our admission decisions are first come, first served, and will close 
whenever we reach our intake capacity for the academic year. To help the process move smoothly, we recommend that you do the following:

Examine our application criteria above to determine your suitability for our MS-BAIS program. If you wish to apply, submit your application, 
complete with GRE/GMAT scores, college transcripts, and other necessary details to USF Office of Graduate Admissions using our online portal.
The Graduate Admissions Office will notify you the receipt of your application, assign you a U number, review your application and supporting 
documentation, and if complete, will refer your application to the MS in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Business Analytics program. This 
process may take up to one month, depending on their workload.
If your application is incomplete (e.g., missing TOEFL score, missing application fee, etc.), it will not be processed beyond this stage. 
Please check our online portal to see what is missing from your application. You can also contact the Graduate Admissions Office at 
813-974-3350 or GradAdmissions@usf.edu (not the MS in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Business Analytics program director) for further help 
in this regard.
If your application is forwarded to the MS in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Business Analytics program, we will notify you by e-mail our 
receipt of your application and ask you to provide additional supplemental information via an online form. If you did not receive this e-mail, 
your application is likely still pending at our Graduate Admissions Office; contact them for the status of your application.
The MS in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Business Analytics program will review your complete application and notify you the final decision 
on your application. Expect this process to take another 15-20 days. This is an unofficial decision; the official decision will come from the 
Graduate Admissions Office. This is the end of the admissions process, but you still have a long way to go to join our program.
International students will now have to provide proof of funds for our Office of International Students to issue you an I-20. This may require 
a bank statement or a bank loan. Domestic students may skip to Step 8.
After receiving your I-20, schedule a visa appointment at your nearest US consulate or embassy. Depending on applicant volume, it may take 
months to get a visa appointment. If you don’t get your visa appointment in a timely manner, you may have to defer your joining date to the 
following semester. Let us know if you choose to defer. If you change your mind and want to join another university, you will have to restart 
your I-20 process with your new university and get a new visa, which may further delay your arrival to the USA by several more months.
In parallel with your visa process, please ask us to for a prerequisite check. We will examine yoru transcript and prior work to determine if 
you meet our program prerequisites. If you do not , we will suggest you online courses that you can take to meet these prerequisites. You must 
complete all your prerequisites and e-mail us the certificate of completion before we can register you for classes for your first semester. 
Students not meeting prerequisites will have to take remedial classes first, which may add to their cost and delay graduation from our 
program.
Plan to arrive to our campus at least one week before the start of the semester. This is the time when we do orientation sessions and conduct 
free workshops (bootcamps) on R and Python – the two programming languages you must know for your first day of class. If you miss these 
bootcamps, it will be your responsibility to learn these tools on your own. Our professors don’t teach programming in class; they assume that 
you attended the bootcamps, are conversant in these tools, and are ready to use them to build statistical models and machine learning models 
in your first semester. This extra week will also help you find an apartment to stay, which is quite difficult to get at the start of any 
semester.
Upon arrival to the USF, apply for a USF ID card and NetID. NetID is your single sign on (SSO) access for USF computer systems, including our 
library, Canvas learning management system (which hosts all our class information), Oasis course registration system, Banner grade system, and 
many others.
COSTS
Florida has one of the lowest tuition costs of all states in the United States. Our tuition and fees can be calculated using our online 
tuition calculator at http://usfweb.usf.edu/graduate-studies/tuition-and-fee-calculator/ (enter ‘Graduate (Business, Engineering)’ in the 
Program Level drop down menu; the MS in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Business Analytics program is a minimum of 33 credits, not including 
any outstanding prerequisites).

As of 2022, the out-of-state tuition and fees for a two-year MS in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Business Analytics degree for an 
international student is approximately $30,000. Students should also include another $15,000-20,000 for two years of living expenses while in 
the program.

GRADUATE ASSISTANTSHIPS
We have a limited number of graduate (teaching) assistantships, which typically make students eligible for a lower, in-state tuition and pays 
for their health insurance during their term of assistantship, in addition to providing them a monthly stipend. Assistantship decisions are 
highly competitive and made on a semester-to-semester basis, based on students’ performance in prior semesters at USF, their work ethic, and 
their ability to assist us with undergraduate and graduate classes. For example, we will only hire students with a strong background in 
statistics as teaching assistants for our statistics classes. Assistantships are not available in your first semester at USF, but will be 
available from the second semester onwards, based on your performance in prior semesters at USF. Note that assistantships are not merit-based 
or need-based scholarships, they are on-campus jobs, for which you are expected to work for 20 hours/week as assigned by your supervising 
professor.

Additional on-campus job opportunities are available as graduate assistants in other offices, departments, and centers on the USF campus, for 
example, at our Dean’s office, the Provost’s office, at USF Library, our INTO program office, USF Morsani Center of Medicine, USF Center for 
Urban Transportation Research, and other departments on campus. These jobs typically require specific skills such as Power BI, coding, and so 
forth. These are university-wide positions, and students are selected based on their fit with job requirements. Our students are often 
considered favorably for these positions because of their strong technical skills. Only students already enrolled at USF have access to such 
positions on an internal USF portal, called Handshake.  Incoming international students cannot apply for these jobs from their home countries.

Students can also do paid full-time or part-time internships at a US company for a maximum of 12 months as part of the curricular practical 
training (CPT) option of the program, while fully retaining their 18-month optional practical training (OPT) to secure a job and a work visa 
upon completion of their MS in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Business Analytics degree. You must complete two fu semesters of coursework at 
USF to be eligible for an internship. Our students often get internship positions in prestigious companies like Amazon, BMW, and JP Morgan 
Chase, and many of these internships often convert into full-time positions upon graduation.

CURRICULUM
The MS in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Business Analytics degree requires 33 credits of coursework, plus any necessary prerequisite 
courses, and may be taken either full-time or part-time. This includes 18 credits of required courses (core courses and capstone) and 15 
credits of electives. The required courses are:

ISM 6218: Advanced Database Management Systems (1st semester)
QMB 6304: Foundations of Business Statistics (1st semester)
ISM 6251: Machine Learning (1st semester)
ISM 6124: Advanced Systems Analysis and Design (2nd semester)
ISM 6225: Application Development for Analytics
ISM 6155: Enterprise Information Systems Management
If you meet our program prerequisites, we will automatically register you for the first three courses in the above list in your first semester 
in our program. From your second semester onwards, you will have the flexibility to choose classes of your interest. Depending on your desired 
career path, you may wish to consider the following sequences of courses:

Data science:
QMB 6304: Foundations of Business Statistics (1st semester)
ISM 6137: Advanced Statistical Modeling (Prereq: QMB 6304)
ISM 6642: Advanced Data Science (Prereq: ISM 6137)
AI/ML engineer:
ISM 6251: Machine Learning (1st semester)
ISM 6568: Deep Learning (Prereq: ISM 6251)
ISM 6564: Text Analytics (Prereq: ISM 6251)
Data engineering:
ISM 6218: Advanced Database Management Systems (1st semester)
ISM 6208: Data Warehousing (Prereq: ISM 6218)
ISM 6562: Big Data for Business (Prereq: ISM 6218)
BI developer:
ISM 6218: Advanced Database Management Systems (1st semester)
ISM 6419: Data Visualization
ISM 6208: Data Warehousing (Prereq: ISM 6218)

Of course, you can mix and match courses from different sequences or choose other courses not listed here from our course catalog. Optionally, 
students can choose one of three possible concentrations—analytics and business intelligence, Fintech, and information assurance—by choosing a 
certain set of elective courses recommended for each concentration. However, a concentration is not necessary to complete your degree.

Typically, most courses are 3 credit hours, except internship and independent study courses which are 1-2 credits. Full-time students with 
appropriate prerequisites may be able to complete the program in 3-4 semesters of study. Part-time students will typically need from 2-3 years 
to complete the degree. For more information on our coursework or prerequisite requirements, feel free to contact the program advisor below. 

GLOBAL EXECUTIVE PROGRAM
This Global Executive Master of Science in Artificial Intelligence and Business Analytics program is designed for full-time, working 
professionals worldwide. This is a fully online program with 100% live instruction that combines information systems and business analytics 
courses. This program offers a predetermined set of required and elective courses in a lockstep format, without the flexibility or 
customizability of our regular program. Since students in this executive program are already full-time working professionals, our 
extracurricular support (bootcamps, internships, job placement, etc.) are not available to students in this program.

CONTACT
Han Reichgelt
Graduate Coordinator, MS in Artificial Intelligence and Business Analytics
School of Information Systems and Management
Muma College of Business
Phone: (727) 873-4786
muma-msaiba@usf.edu

University of South Florida
